
(877) 918-7243   |   Contact Us                                                                  
Live Chat Service
Visiplex, Inc. Logo

    Home
    Markets
    Products
    Solutions
    Downloads
    Support
    About Us

Time Synchronization System
Visiplex’s wireless time synchronization system offers schools, medical and commercial facilities with the ability to synchronize their clocks, bells and other time-sensitive equipment to one accurate time source.
Time Synchronization System for Wireless Clocks and Bells

    Provide wireless time synchronization throughout your facility, regardless of size

    Full selection of wireless analog and digital clocks to match your needs

    Use wireless PA speakers to add synchronized tone & voice break bell alerts

    Easy system expansion, relocation and cost-effective wireless installation

    Expandable to provide wireless PA messaging for voice notifications and alerts

Add, Replace or Upgrade your existing Clock or Bell System

    Replace an old, non-functioning clock system without running wires
    Add analog/digital wireless synchronized clocks across your facility

    Expand an existing clock system into other buildings without running wires

    Upgrade your current clock system to include pre-programmed messaging and break-bell schedule

Contact our Sales
Secure A Demo System
More About Visiplex

College campuses, K-12 schools, hospitals, medical centers, government facilities, commercial plants and industrial facilities all have a great need to synchronize their clocks, bells and other time-sensitive equipment to one accurate and reliable time source. Using a radio transmitter, the Visiplex’s time synchronization system sends accurate time information to synchronize wirelessly all of the facility’s clocks and bells. The time source for the time synchronization system could be a GPS receiver or a local PC with accurate web synchronized time.

Visiplex offers analog clocks, LED digital clocks and LED display message boards in a variety of styles and sizes to match all facility needs. The Visiplex wireless time synchronization system is easy to install and adding or replacing clocks is done with minimal effort providing the benefits of improved productivity and reduced maintenance costs.

Using wireless PA speakers, this system can be expanded at any point to provide additional critical communication tasks, such as indoor/outdoor voice messaging, wireless two-way intercom communications and scheduled break bell alerts.

All Visiplex system components use UL approved parts and are compliant with NFPA-72 2010 standards, Department of Defense United Facilities Criteria (UFC), speech intelligibility (STI-PA) standard 2003 IEC 60268-16, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), OSHA and ADA standards and codes. Visiplex is an authorized government supplier (GSA listed).
© 2016 Visiplex, Inc. | All Rights Reserved. All Visiplex marks contained herein are trademarks of Visiplex and/or its affiliated companies.
FacebookYouTubeTwitterGoogle+Linkedin

